---
layout: post
title: ElixirConf2016 and Ecto
date: 2016-09-03 08:53:13
description: Review of Elixir Config 2016
categories: Elixir
tags:
---

Just got back from ElixirConf2016. It was an awesome experience even with how wet
Disney World was from the side effects of Hurricane Hermine. Very interesting
sessions and a lot of excitement. Also seemed like a really nice community.
Lots of folks coming from Rails. A couple people from Java.

There were 542 attendees and that was basically doubled from last year's
conference. A large number of people already had Elixir/Phoenix code in
production - which was encouraging. I was there more as a tourist than
anything. Trying to figure out if this is something that I should really
try and dig into or just something to play around with. I think by the
end of the conference I thought that this was something that has a real
chance to be a solid development community over the next decade.

I enjoyed every talk that I went to but the one by Darin Wilson (@darinwilson)
on Ecto was immediately useful and something that I was able to quickly
wrap my head around with my database background. Ecto is Elixir's database
wrapper. It's relatively new - like most of Elixir - but its really
well thought out and usable.

Darin's talk and sample project (a music db) covered a lot of Ecto use cases,
including :

```
    belongs_to :artist, Artist
    has_many :tracks, Track
    many_to_many :genres, Genre, join_through: "albums_genres"
```

Its worth checking out if you are new to Ecto. Its in github at [music_db github repo](https://github.com/darinwilson/music_db).

The actual database access is provided by an Adapter that implements
a set of callbacks and a driver that implements the database communication
protocol (it appears - I'm still learning this myself). The default relational
database is Postgres (good choice!).

Ecto just released version 2.0 and the only Adapter that appears to work at
this point is Postgres. MySQL and MongoDB were supported < 2.0 so hopefully
support for them is added back shortly.

The preferred syntax to form queries is key-word based. This should work well
for standard database models. Again, there are decent examples in Darin's sample
project.

Will be spending a few hours trying to wrap my head around using Ecto for a work
model of Users, Roles, Accounts, etc.
